Current flow in a circuit, is measured in amperes, or, amps, for short.
The amount of current flow in a circuit, is determined by the amount of the supply voltage, or pushing force of the electrons; and how much the circuit retards the flow of electrons.

For example, if the supply voltage were to be doubled, the amount of current flow in the circuit, would also be doubled; because there is more "pushing force", to make more free electrons move.

Likewise, if the voltage supply were to be halved, the amount of current flow in the circuit, would also be halved; because there is less "pushing force", to move the electrons.

If the voltage remained the same, but the resistance of the circuit were to be doubled, the amount of current flow in the circuit, would be cut in half; because it is twice as hard to move the electrons with the added resistance.

Note the purple color of the electrons between the two lights.
The reason for this, is because "that" wire is no longer at a positive potential, nor is it at a negative potential.
It is somewhere in between the two. We will discuss this in more detail in a later section.

The current flow in the circuit would be doubled.
Because the parallel circuit, has created less resistance to the electron flow, by providing another path for electrons to go down.

Note that the electron Flo splits Here: Half of the electrons will flow through the lower light circuit, and half will flow through the upper light circuit.
The electrons come back together here: to form one path of flow back to the positive side of the baddery.

Slide 6 -----------------------------------------------------------------

The electrical resistance of an object, is a measure of its opposition to the flow of current in a circuit. 
The amount of resistance an object has, is given in ohms, and is represented by the omega symbol.
One ohm, is the amount of resistance required, to limit current flow, to one amp of current, when the applied voltage is one volt.

The number of free electrons in the resistor, is what determines the amount of current flow.
In this case, there are enough free electrons in the resistor to allow one amp of current flow.
When the resistor resistance is changed to 2 ohms, the number of free electrons is cut in half, which in turn, cuts the circuit current in half.

Even though there are plenty of free electrons in the wires;  the current of the entire circuit, will still be limited by the number of free electrons in the resistance of the circuit.
The resistance of the circuit is more or less, the throttle for current flow.
The hight the circuit resistance is, the lower the current flow will be in the circuit.
And con versely, the lower the circuit resistance is, the higher the current flow will be in the circuit.

Also note, if parallel resistance is added to the circuit, the resistance of the entire circuit will decrease.
The added parallel resistance, provides an alternate path, that offers more free electrons to the entire circuit.

The higher the circuit resistance is, the lower the current flow will be in the circuit.
And con versely, the lower the circuit resistance is, the higher the current flow will be in the circuit.

Slide7
The circuit shown here is called a series circuit because all of the components, are in line with one another.

The characteristics of a series circuit are:
1) Current flow is the same, in all parts of the circuit.
2) Changes in resistance, changes current flow.
3) The sum of the voltage drops of the circuit, is equal to the supply voltage.

Current flow, in a DC circuit, has to be measured in line with the components.
The circuit has to be broken, and the meter leads inserted in series with the components.

In this circuit, the amp meter shows the current draw to be 1 amp.
We know this is correct, because ohm's law states that the current draw in a circuit, is equal to the voltage, divided by the resistance.

Eye, is equal to current.
V, is equal to voltage.
And R, is equal to resistance.

No matter where the meter leads are placed in this circuit, the current draw will always be the same, because all of the components, are inline with one another.
Since R one, is the only resistance in this circuit, the current flow is limited by the resistance, of that resistor.

Even if two or more resistors, were added in series; the current flow will still be the same throughout the entire circuit.

We can use ohms law, to calculate the circuit current.
V, is equal to thirteen point six volts.
R, is equal to the total resistance of the circuit - 13.6 ohms, plus 13.6 ohms, gives us 27.2 ohms, of total circuit resistance.
13.6, divided by 27.2, is equal to .5 amps, which is what the meter is reading.

As the current flows thu the resistor, the potential starts to change from a negative potential, to a positive potential.
As the current exits the resistor, it is at 100% positive potential because it is connected directly to the positive terminal of the baddery.

This means that all of the supplied voltage: 13.6 volts in this case, has been dropped across: R1.
Note that the polarity of the voltage drop across are 1, is opposite from the polarity of the baddery.

According to Kirchoff's voltage law: the algebraic sum, of all the voltages around any closed loop in a circuit, is equal to zero.

When using Kirchoff's law, the voltage supplied by the power source, is considered to be a positive number, and the loads are considered to be negative numbers.
This is because the voltage drops in a circuit, have the opposite polarity of the baddery.

Now let's look at how potential, and voltage drop, operate in circuits with more than one resistor.
In this circuit, the left side of R1, is directly connected to the negative side of the baddery.
This puts the left side of R1, at the same negative potential as the negative side of the baddery. 
The left side of R3, is directly connected to the positive side of the baddery, causing it to be at the same positive potential as the positive side of the baddery.

As the current flows thru R 1, the potential starts to move toward a more positive potential.
Note that the potential does not change as the current flows through the connecting wires.
This is because the wires have very little resistance, and do not drop any voltage.
As current passes thru R 2, the potential moves even more positive.
Again note, the potential does not change as the current flows through the connecting wires.
As the current flow flows through R 3, the potential moves even more positive.
And now finally, as the current flow leaves  r 3, it is now at the same positive potential as the positive baddery terminal.

Slide 8
Voltage, current, resistance, and power, are all related to one another.
If any one of these circuit parameters change, other parameters will be affected.
Ohm's law, describes the relationship between these circuit parameters.
This ohm's law chart is helpful in understanding this relationship.

The chart is broken up into 4 sections.
Section one gives the relationships as related to voltage.
Section two is for resistance.
Section three is for power.
And section four is for current.

In this circuit, the supply voltage is 13.6 volts D C.
The total resistance of the circuit is:
R 1, plus, R 2, plus, H 1.  (H1 is a heater).
This makes the total resistance of the circuit: 25 ohms.

The total current of the circuit is not given, nor is the total power, but we can calculate those values using ohm's law.

We can use the "current section", of the ohms law chart, to calculate the total current of the circuit.
Note that the current section of the chart, contains three formulas.
This is because the current value can be obtained from different unknowns.
In our case, the resistance and voltage are given to us, so we will use the formula that uses voltage and resistance, to calculate current draw.
We see that I, (current), is equal to E, (voltage), divided by, R, (resistance).
In this example, V, is equal to 13.6 volts, divided by 25 ohms.
Which equals: point five four four amps.

To calculate power, (also known as watts), we use the power section of the "ohms law chart".

Note that the power section of the ohms law chart, contains three formulas also.
Since we now know the voltage, current, and resistance of the circuit, we can use any of these formulas, to calculate power.
Using the p, equals, I times E formula, we have, 13.6 volts, times .5 4 amps, equals 7.29 watts.

Using current and voltage to calculate, we have:
13.6 volts, times, point 5 4 4 amps, equals 7.39 watts.

Using current and resistance we have:
Point 5 4 4 amps squared, (which is, point 5 4 4 times point 5 4 4), times, 25 ohms, equals: 7.39 watts.

Using voltage and resistance we have:
13.6 volts squared, divided by 25 ohms, equals: 7.39 watts.

To illustrate how voltage, current, resistance and power are affected by one another, let's change the baddery voltage, from 13.6 volts, to thirty volts.

Slide 9
This is a parallel circuit; because all of the components are in parallel with one another.
As current flow leaves the baddery, it makes it's way around the entire circuit, in two independent circuits.
The characteristics of a parallel circuit are:
1) Circuits are made up of parallel branches.
2) Current flow is dependant upon branch resistance.
3) Voltage drop is the same across parallel branches.
4), Added parallel resistance, decreases total resistance.

The total current draw of this circuit, is equal to the sum of the current draw of each branch.
Using ohm's law, thirteen point six volts, divided by, twenty ohms, equals, point 6 8 amps.

The current draw of branch 2 is: thirteen point six volts, divided by, ten ohms, equals, one point 3 6 amps.
This makes I T, equal to point 6 8 amps, plus, one point 3 6 amps.
This gives us a total current draw of: 2 point 0 4 amps.

Now let's see what happens when we change the resistance of one of the branches.

Let's change r 2, in branch 2, to 20 ohms, and recalculate current draw for each branch.

The resistance of branch 1 did not change, there fore, the calculation is the same as before.
Note that even though the resistance of branch 2 was changed, it didn't have any effect on branch one's current.

Now let's recalculate branch two's current draw.
Thirteen point six volts, divided by, twenty ohms, equals point six eight amps.
Note that the current draw, in branch two, is now different than it was, when it had the ten ohm resistor.
Also note that the current draw, in branch two, is the same as the current draw in branch one.
This is because both branches, have the same resistance.

The total current draw for the circuit, is now point 6 8 amps, plus, point 6 8 amps, which is equal to, one point 3 6 amps.

Now let's look at voltage drops across parallel circuits.

The voltage drop across R 1, is 13.6 volts.
This is because the black meter lead, is directly connected to the negative terminal of the baddery.
And, the red lead, is directly connected to the positive terminal of the baddery.

The same is true of R 2.
The black meter lead at R 2, is directly connected to the negative side of the baddery.
And, the red meter lead at R 2, is directly connected to the positive side.
The voltage drop across parallel circuits, will always be the same in all branches, but, the current flow could be different, depending on whether the parallel resistances are the same, or not.

Parallel resistance in a circuit, decreases the total resistance of that circuit.
The total resistance of a parallel circuit, is given by this formula:
R t, is equal to, one, divided by, one divided by, r 1, plus, one divided by, r 2, plus, one divided by, r 3, etcetra, for all the resistors in the parallel circuit.

Using this circuit to illustrate, first, we divide one, by r 1, twenty ohms.
This is equal to, point 0 5 ohms.
Next, we divide one, by r 2, twenty ohms.
This is equal to, point 0 5 ohms.
Next, we add the two values together.
This is equal to .1 ohms.
Next, we divide one, by point one ohms.
This is equal to a total circuit resistance of ten ohms.

When the resistance of parallel branches in a circuit are the same value, the combined, or total resistance of the branches, will be equal to half of the individual branch resistance.
In our example here, each branch has a resistance of twenty ohms, there for, the combined or total resistance of the branches is ten ohms.

This is what an equivalent series circuit would look like.

If the resistance of the parallel branches are not the same value, the combined, or total resistance of the parallel branches, will always be, less than the lowest resistor of a branch.

For example, if R 2 were to be changed to five ohms, the combined, or total resistance of the circuit, would be four ohms.

Move the resistance sliders up and down, to see how different resistances, affect current flow.
When you're done, press the play button to continue.

The most important things to take away from the lesson are:
1) Current flow in a parallel branch is not affected by other parallel branches.
2) The voltage drop across parallel circuits will always be the same voltage.
3) When parallel branch resistances are equal, the total resistance of the branches will be half of the resistance of the individual resistances.
4) When parallel branch resistances are not equal, the total resistance of the branches will less than, the smallest branch resistance.

Slide 10
This circuit contains both series, and parallel circuits.
As current leaves the baddery, it is in a series circuit, but when the current hits point a, the current flow splits into two branches.
At point B, the current comes back together to form a series circuit again, and flows back to the baddery.

Note the potentials in the circuit.
The left side of R 1 and R 2, are at negative potential.
This is because the left side of those resistors, is at the same point electrically, as the negative side of the baddery.
The bottom side of  r 3 is at positive potential.
Because the bottom side of r 3, is at the same point electrically, as the positive side of the baddery.
The potential between the resistors is some where between negative and positive potential.

In the circuit shown, we have two parallel ten ohm resistors, plus one ten ohm series resistor.
One, divided by ten ohms, plus one divided by ten ohms, is equal to point two ohms.
One, divided by point two ohms, is equal to, five ohms.
This is the combined resistance of the two branches.
Five ohms, plus, the series resistance of ten ohms, is equal to, fifteen ohms of total resistance.

Now that total circuit resistance has been calculated, we can calculate total current.
Using the ohms law chart for current, we have, i, is equal to, Voltage, divided by, resistance.
In this circuit, we have, the baddery voltage of 24 volts, divided by the total circuit resistance of 15 ohms, is equal to one point 6 amps.

////////This is because the black meter lead, is electrically the same point, as the positive terminal of the baddery.
And, the red meter lead, is electrically the same point, as the negative terminal of the baddery.
Note: The resistance of R 1, r 2, and R 3, are effictively seen as an electrical short to the volt meter.
This is because there is no current flow in the circuit.
No current flow means no voltage drop across the resistors, therefore it is as if those resistors weren't in the circuit.

Now let's look at s 2.
Since s 2, in the closed position, has no resistance, the voltage drop across the switch will be zero volts.
When s 2 is opened, the voltage drop and potentials will not be the same as when s 1 was opened.
Because s 2, is not in series with the battery.

Now let's examine potentials.
The black meter lead is directly connected to r 2, but there is no current flow through r2, so it is seen, as an electrical short to the volt meter.
Continuing on, we come to r 3.

Note that the trace color is purple.
Purple is used because that section of the circuit, isn't at a negative potential, nor is it at a positive potential, it is somewhere in between.

Since r3 is dropping some of the potential, the voltage drop across s 2, is twelve point five volts.
One side of S 2 is directly connected to s 3, this means that the potential is the same at both points.

The same is true of the other side of s 2.
s 2 is directly connected to r 1 and r 3.
All of these connected points are electrically at the same potential.

And the remainder of the 24 volts (12.5 volts), is dropped across R 3.

Since the r 1 circuit, is in parallel with the r 2 circuit., the voltage drop will be the same.
This makes perfect sense, because the left side of s 2, is directly connected to the left side of r1.
And, the right side of s 2 is directly connected to the right side of r 1.
Therefore, the meter leads across s 2, is exactly the same point electrically, as the meter leads across r 1.
R 3, has current flow and is therefore, not an electrical short to the meter.

This means that r3 has dropped part of the positive potential of the battery.

It is very important, that you understand how voltage potential works.
Voltage potential must be fully understood, in order to make accurate volt meter readings.
All of the black trace lines represent, full, 100% negative potential.
The red trace lines represent 100% positive potential.
The purple trace lines represent, a potential that is somewhere in between full positive and full negative potential.




